=head1 Basic Assumptions

If you have any grasp of programming languages at all, you'll appreciate that most languages and most programmers count from zero. The chapters of this book are no exception. In this case, chapter 0 (you're reading it, in case you hadn't realised) is all about what I, the author, am assuming about you, the reader, before we start.

So let's get cracking!

=head2 Why are you here?

One of the great philosohpical questions of the universe. However, in this case, we'll restrict it to the more relevant question...

=head2 Why are you reading this book?

Hopefully, you were drawn in by the title. The important things to note about the title, in this humble author's opinion, are two words that are there, and one that isn't.

First off, the ones that I<are> there.

=head3 "Learning"

OK, so, maybe that's obvious. But this book is about learning - not just teaching. If you're here expecting to read it cover-to-cover and walk away with a complete grasp of the subject material, you're probably out of luck. 
There is no substitute for getting your hands dirty. It's a well-known tenet of education that, while it's possible to teach kids by standing up at the front of a room and letting them absorb facts, I<adults learn by doing>. 

=head3 "Programming"

It's something of a personal crusade of mine that I want to hire and train Perl I<programmers>, not Perl I<scripters>. It's just as possible to write good programs in Perl as it is in any of the other 'Enterprise' languages (Java, Ruby, Python, C#, etc etc), provided you approach it with the same mindset as you would any of those languages.

And the word that's not there?

=head3 "Perl"

Obviously enough, this is a Perl book - it uses the Perl OO framework Moose as its means of teaching you how to be an OO programmer. Equally obviously, it's targetted at Perl programmers or wanna-be Perl programmers (again, that word is 'programmer'!). But first and foremost, I want to teach you OO progamming - something that's universally useful whatever language you write in. The core concepts are unchanged, whether you wind up doing it in in Perl, Java, Ruby or Objective C.

Why does leave the question.. why Moose?

If you have (and it isn't necessary) a familiarity with Perl OO as originally released with Perl 5, you'll be awere that it's entirely possible to spend more time coding the nuts and bolts of your OO implementation than you do writing useful code for your application. Moose is a Perl OO framework that hides the nuts and bolts from you, in a way that really I<does> work, unlike many of its predecessors, and leaves you to get on with what you're paid to do. Or in this case, what I'm here to do, which is teach you about OO.

=head2 What you need to know before reading this book

The main assumption this book makes is that you know I<some> Perl. At the very least, in fact, the following

=over

=item Basic Perl datatypes and control structures and how to use them

=item A grasp of the fundamentals of references in Perl, specifically

=over

=item hashrefs

=item arrayrefs

=item coderefs

=back

=back

If the latter, in particular, scares you, I recommend treating yourself to a copy of chromatic's "Modern Perl" (go on, the online version is free!) before you sit down with this book. 

=head2 What you need to work with the examples in this book

=head3 Perl (no, really)

You will need a working Perl installation, which you can use to play with the code examples and exercises in this book. More importantly, you will need a working Perl installation (preferably Perl 5.12 or newer), to which you can add modules, 

Fortunately, this is a lot easier than it used to be. If you're on a Unix based OS, including any Linux distro´or MacOS X), I<perlbrew> comes to the rescuse, as long as you have access to a C compiler. Equally, on Windows, you can install Strawberry Perl and get a working Perl environment you control. Appendix 1 covers how to get going on both these platforms in much more detail if you need it.

=head3 Moose and its supporting modules

Once you have a working Perl that you control, you'll need to install Moose. The best way of doing this, which also picks up a bunch of other handy modules, is to install I<Task::Kenshop::OOP> from the Enligtened Perl Organization's I<Task::Kensho> series. Appendix 2 will cover the details of how to do this for both Unix-like OS's and Windows, if you're unfamiliar with the process.

=cut